Olli Kangas, Joakim Palme & Markus Kainu
Stratification and Sustainability in Different Worlds of Welfare: 
Welfare State Entry and Exit over the Life Course:

[abstract: 149 words; main text including title, table, authors and references = 6 724 words; plus 6 figures a 250 words]
Abstract
In the footsteps of ‘The Three Worlds’, we analyse current challenges for old and new welfare regimes in terms of stratification and sustainability. This brings the interplay between employment and the welfare state into focus. We first analyse transitions from school to work, then we examine labour market participation rates of mothers, and lastly we look at the exit patterns among the pre-retirement elderly. Among the current ‘Worlds of Welfare’, our results show remarkable regime differences in how countries are able to deal with stratification and sustainability over the economic life cycle. Is this a consequence of an inescapable trade-off between stratification and sustainability where policy design is a result of different political preferences? We argue against that and suggest that, in future research, a ‘variable approach’ could be used for unlocking the ‘regime approach’ in the analysis of welfare state exit-entry patterns and inform a new policy agenda for ageing societies.
Introduction
Re-visiting The Three Worlds is an interesting exercise. It remains an inspiring treatise on some of the most important issues in political economy of our time. By using concepts such as de-commodification, the public-private mix, and the social wage, Gøsta Esping-Andersen elaborated an analysis of welfare state institutions that was both dynamic and theoretically driven. He then observed how the institutional configurations not only conditioned peoples’ behaviours but also shaped inequalities in society. The stratification processes he identified clustered countries in a way that made it possible to talk about ‘Three Worlds’ of welfare capitalism. We argue that it is the identification of these processes, rather than the particular clustering nations at the time, which in retrospect is the most profound contribution of the book. What we see as an equally important - but more sketchy - theme in the book is related to the concept of sustainability, an issue which Esping-Andersen returned to in later publications (e.g, Esping-Andersen 2002).
The aim of our contribution is to support these claims, that we need to further elborate the goal dimensions of the welfare state in conceptual terms. We do this by exploring what we see as a very promising avenue offered by The Three Worlds: We use various risks that individuals meet over their life cycle as an analytical grid. Esping-Andersen’s perspective is here integrated with an understanding of how the transformations of employment among the most advanced industrial nations in different ways were interlinked with the welfare state regimes. The focus is on the entry and exit patterns on the labour market where the state, family and market intersect and interact. The process is intimately related to the silent revolutions (Esping-Andersen 1999, 2002, 2009) of post-industrial labour markets, where female labour market participation, service employment and new entry/exit patterns challenge the prevailing welfare regimes. This brings us to examine what we see as the two fundamental themes of ‘The Three Worlds’; stratification and sustainability, and how they may interact. 
The Three Worlds highlighted stratification pertaining to status segmentation (especially pensions) and employment structures (paid absence from work, labour supply and labour-market exit). Class-startification became conditioned on the welfare state design. The feminist critique pointed to the ‘gender blindness’ of Esping-Andersen’s analysis (see e.g. Orloff 1993; Sainsbury 1996; Lewis 1997; Prince Cooke 2011). The recent decades has taught us that there are good reasons to more explicitly incorporate, not only gender but also immigration and ethnicity as stratification dimensions (Sainsbury 2012). Within the scope of this paper, we have only able to use the example mothers to indicate that the sartification analysis is in great need for improvement including immigration/ethnicity.While Esping-Andersen’s worry about sustainability of the welfare state revolved around post-industrial employment structures and possible challenges caused by changes in employment patterns, we see a potential in exploiting the life-cycle perspective for that analytical dimension. Following in his footsteps, we pay attention to the interaction between stratification and sustainability  and analyse the interaction  by exploring new kinds of sustainability data for the post-1990 worlds of welfare capitalism. 
Whereas ‘the bigger, the better’ was an underlying theme in ‘The Three Worlds’, the solvency of public finances is on the fore in recent debates and policy-makers seek for approaches for the welfare state to meet new challenges. Our purpose is not to give a full-fledged and in-depth analysis on some specific theme in ‘The Three Worlds’, but to discuss some recent policy discourses that are important for understanding challenges for the present-day welfare state. Each of the themes we touch upon already is subject of a major literature and more than complex enough for a huge pile of papers. Our contribution is not to analyse one specific aspect in detail, rather, we try to sketch the dimensions Esping-Andersen partly lost on the way from WZB in Berlin to the EUI in Florence in the second half of the 1980s, as he completed The Three Worlds. It is an analysis of life-course transitions in different welfare states. The theme has later been worked on by other scholars, notably Karl Ulrich Mayer (e.g. 2004). What we try to do is “…to suggest one way in which we may fruitfully analyse contemporary change” (Esping-Andersen 1990, 229).  
We start by looking at demographic challenges for the solvency of the welfare state and cursorily discuss the concept of sustainability deficit to describe the severity of fiscal challenges in different countries. Sustainability deficit is looked at from two different angles: from population projections extending to the 2050s and from the concept of life-cycle deficits (LCD). The LCD approach highlights the interplay between employment and the welfare state; exit and entry in both domains. After that, we first analyse transitions from school to work to see how different regimes manage to facilitate that transition. Then follows a longer section where the labour market participation patterns of mothers are examined. The last empirical section looks at the exit patterns of the older part of the labour force and stratification risks associated with that phase in the life cycle. In the final section we discuss our findings in more general terms.  
Data and new worlds 
In the 1980s, there was really very little systematic data available about the Southern European countries, Asia and Latin America, not to speak about the former socialist hemisphere. This is now changing. As a consequence, the number of identified welfare regimes has increased (see e.g. Aidukaite 2004; Gough 2004; Castles & al. 2012; Scruggs & al. 2014). The production of data appears to be bifurcating: OECD has expanded its scope to new countries; Southern Europe, former Socialist countries, Mexico, and South Korea. Eurostat produces deeper and more extensive information on the EU Member States (which have more doubled in numbers since 1990). In addition to macro-level data, Eurostat also releases individual-level data (the European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions longitudinal micro-data, EU SILC, Eurostat 2013a). The flip-side is that the extensive EU-data excludes non-European countries that were constitutive parts of GEA’s liberal regime. We have chosen to analyse data that represent the early 1980s, i.e. the same time point that GEA used in his Three Worlds, and then contrast that picture with data for the period 2005 to 2010. Despite improved data availability, for some of the analyses we had to restrict ourselves to a few countries.
The emphasis on the life cycle in the subsequent analysis will be carried out against the backdrop of the general solvency problems of the European welfare state (see below). Here the concept of life cycle deficits (LCD) which has been developed in the context of the National Transfer Accounts (NTA; see http://www.ntaccounts.org/web/nta/show) project is a useful tool for bridging the analysis between the macro and micro levels.
In the following, we have ‘expanded’ the number of worlds of welfare to five when data permitted: the Nordic (consisting of Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden); Continental European (Austria, Belgium, Germany, France, the Netherlands and Switzerland); Anglo Lliberal (Ireland and the UK; In some graphs (Figure 5) we also depict the Australian (AUS) and the United States (US) developmental patterns); Southern European (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain); and Post Socialist (Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Slovak Republic and Slovenia) welfare regimes (e.g. Castles & al. 2012). Depending on available data the number of countries in each regime may vary. Unfortunately, the LCD figures are yet available only for a handful of countries.
Methodologically the paper is exploratory. By describing the development of some key variables that capture stratification and sustainability over the life course, we can identify patterns with regard to ‘goal-performance’ of different institutional regimes. As will be argued in the concluding section, if we want to move beyond broad descriptions we need to move beyond the regime approach. This is as important for sharpening the analytical tools of comparative research, as it is for turning research into policy prescription.
Challenges for the welfare state: Sustainability and stratification deficits
In The Three Worlds, population change was not the main issue. However, when expenditure levels continued to increase in the 1990, the discussion on new challenges caused by the greying population and problematic dependency ratios got a prominent position in the discourse on the future of the welfare state (e.g., Blossfeld, Bucholz & Kurz 2011; Park 2011; European Commission 2012a; Vanhuysse & Gorres 2012; OECD 2013).
The projected increase in the share of elderly will increase demands for income transfers and social and health services. There are a number of indicators aimed at evaluating the fiscal pressures that the population change will generate. One such measure is the ‘sustainability deficit’, a device used by the European Commission (e.g. 2009 and 2012) to inspect future needs for structural adjustments of public finances in the EU Member States. The concept of ‘sustainability deficit’ – or fiscal gap – pertains to the ability of a welfare state to maintain its current programs, spending levels and taxes in the decades to come. On the basis of these estimates, it is possible to judge what the needs are for immediate and long-run tax increases, or benefit cuts, for maintaining government solvency. The size of the adjustments is expressed as a percentage of the GDP. Despite all the uncertainties linked to such long-run prognoses, they indicate the magnitude of reforms required to reconcile projected revenues with expenditures. The sustainability deficit varies from the low Hungarian (0.4%), German (1.4%), French (1.6%) and Swedish (1.7%) figures to close to 10 % in Belgium. The severity of problems does not follow a clear regime-related pattern: the deficit is among the smallest and largest in some former East-European countries (Hungary 0.5% vs. Slovenia 7.6%; coefficient of variation (CV) among the regime = .93), the same goes for the Central European (Germany vs. Belgium; CV = .64) and Nordic (Sweden vs. Finland 5.8%; CV = .62) clusters. The Liberal regime with high deficit rates (mean = 5.9%) is rather homogenous (CV = .16). (European Commission 2012b, 78).
Cross-sectional projections are one way of looking at the sustainability problems but they are too static. A more dynamic approach is offered by LCD analysis. LCD measures economic flows across age groups by summarising how each age group produces, consumes, transfers and saves resources over the life cycle. Flows between age groups are pertinent to the human lifecycle: children and the elderly consume more than they produce. The flows take place via private transfers and public governmental programs. The deficit is quantified by subtracting the value of consumption from the value of production in each age group. The age-related value and size of transfer flows in relation to value of production indicates the LCD that is positive during the dependent years and negative during the working years (Lee & Mason 2011; Riihelä & al. 2011; Lind 2012).
A LCD inspection tentatively reveals regime-specific peculiarities (which was also pinpointed by GEA). As a rule, in Continental-Europe the youngsters enter earlier into the labour markets than in the Nordic cluster, but in contrast, the older workers have earlier exit from employment than the Nordics. The specific problem for many Post-Socialist countries is the late entry into and the early exit from the labour markets. The Nordic countries display high deficit values for the very young – indicating heavy investments in child care facilities – and for the very old indicating costly old-age care arrangements. (http://ntaccounts.org/web/nta/show/Country%20Summaries). 
Figure 1. Life Cycle Deficit in some EU countries. 
 

While the shadow side of public social care facilities is extensive public expenditure and hence, high tax rates, the sunny side of heavy investments in public services is high female employment rates, which combats sustainability deficit of the welfare state. It has been calculated that one percentage point increase in the employment rate decrease the sustainability deficit by 0.7 percentage point (European Commission 2009). Thus, the level of employment is essential for the solvency of the welfare state. Indeed, high employment rates are a cornerstone of the renowned Scandinavian welfare state model (Kvist et al. 2012). Whereas employment problems in the Nordic countries are associated with the youth phase, the issue in Central and Southern Europe is the (too) early exit from the labour markets. In addition, low female labour force participation hampers the value of production in these countries – which is a challenge for the East-Asian countries, too. What we argue is that this focus is helpful in terms of identifying policy designs that are relevant for combatting both the stratification (class and gender) and sustainability deficits. 
The transition from education to employment
There are substantial variations in national educational systems and these differences have important ramifications for the age of school leave and for the form and duration of the school-to-work transition (Boudon 1974; Shavit & Müller 1998; Müller & Gangl 2003; OECD 2010a; Brzinsky-Fay 2011). As displayed in Figure 2 there is a general trend that girls leave school later than boys (mean school leave ages are 19.3 and 18.1 years, respectively) but the other side of the coin is that the transition to work takes place faster among females than males (1.3 vs. 2.2 years). The gender difference in the duration is partially explained by the compulsory military service for males in a number of EU-countries (Austria, Finland, Greece, Norway and Switzerland). The late exit from school and relatively rapid entry into the labour markets is a Continental European specificity. The phenomenon is related to the dual educational system combining work and studies for non-university students and integrates the students into working life through apprenticeships (e.g. in Austria, Germany and Switzerland; see OECD 2000; Brzinsky-Fay 2011). 
 Figure 2. School leaving age and duration of transition from school to employment. 
 
(Source: OECD 2008, 72)
A complementary way of inspecting the transition from education to employment is to look at the employment situation of those who have finished their final education. Figure 3 depicts employment rates for males and females who have taken their exams one and five years ago, respectively. When it comes to those who have graduated a year ago the gender gap is negligible. It is only in Southern European countries (notably so in Greece, Spain and Italy) where there is a visible gender divide. Employment rates in the other countries and regimes are relatively gender neutral but there are marked differences between countries: the overall employment rates vary from the very low 50 percent in Greece to 80 percent in the Netherlands and Switzerland.
While gender is not an important divide in employment one year after the graduation, impacts of various social institutions creating gender differences in family responsibilities in possibilities for employment become clearer the longer time has passed since graduation (Esping-Andersen 2009). After five years, gender differences are substantial and regime differences are clearly visible. In the Post-Socialist and Southern-European regimes and to some extent also in France, Belgium and Germany women have problems in combining child-rearing and employment which, in turn, results in withdrawal from employment or in very low fertility rates. Differences are smaller in the Nordic countries, Switzerland, the Netherlands and the UK. Thus, the gender divide follows, but not completely, the regime lines. 
Figure3. Employment rates (%) by gender (left-hand panel) and educational attainment (right-hand panel) after leaving education 1 year and 5 years after finishing education. 
 
(Source: OECD 2008, 39-40)
In addition to gender, educational attainment creates obstacles and sorts youngsters into different positions as shown in the right-hand panel in Figure 3. Youngsters without upper secondary education have significantly more problems in entering into the labour markets than better educated. On average, less that 50 percent of the youth with low educational attainment were without job one year after finishing the school. The situation is worst in Southern Europe (Greece and Italy, in particular) and the Post-Socialist (Hungary and Poland) countries. The ‘stratification deficit’ is a common problem among regimes but the magnitude of the problems differs (Allmendinger 1989; Åberg 2003; Gesthuizen & al. (2011); Schröder & Ganzeboom 2014). 
After five years, the situation is better – employments rates are higher after five years than after one year of graduation -- but there still are substantial differences between low and high-skilled. Differences are the smallest in Sweden and in the Netherlands. In some cases (Austria and France) employment rates among highly-skilled are lower after five years than they were after one year – something that is related to children and other family responsibilities. 
Education is a social investment and likely to be the most important stratification mechanisms in the developed world. In 2011, almost half of the age group 15 to 29 years participated in education and close to 40 percent were already was a group of young persons (10 to 20 percent of the age group) who were neither involved in employment, education nor training; the NEETs. (see e.g., http://www.oecd.org/education/skills-beyond-school/EDIF%202013--N%C2%B013%20%28eng%29--FINAL.pdf) Although we can also here trace country-related variation, there are clear welfare regime related patterns. The NEET problem is the smallest in the Nordic and Continental European regimes (5% unemployed and 6 percent inactive). On the other end of the continuum we have the Southern European regime with a NEET-rate totalling 22 percent (13% unemployed and 9% inactive). The Liberal (16% for the UK and 22% for Ireland) and the Post-Socialist (16%) regimes are between these extremes (see also ILO 2013, 90). The social gradient in the NEET-rates is an apparent and an obvious example where stratification and sustainability deficits intersect. 
Economic crises and growing unemployment have made it difficult for those with low educational attainment, in particular, to find jobs. The best results are achieved in countries that combine school and work through various kinds of apprenticeship programs. The question mark here is related to the pattern of early retirement in countries with these kinds of educational regimes. If Lundvall and Lorentz (2012) are right, that universally open and equal education and training systems (that do not create dead ends) in combination with flexible labour market institutions produce the best results in terms activity rates – be the question of young, mature or older labour force, then policy makers in all regimes should reconsider the design of education and production regimes. At least if they want to create the ‘best of all worlds’ where stratification and sustainability deficits are reduced simultaneously.

Employment of mothers 
One of the main criticisms against The Three Worlds was that the book was gender blind. It was argued that the de-commodification index was constructed on the basis of male production worker and failed to describe the situation among women. As a response to the criticism, Esping-Andersen published a number of less ‘gender blind’ books (e.g. 1999; 2001 and 2009). As the discussion on life cycle deficits showed, for the sustainability of the public finances it is important to increase employment rates not only in the beginning and in the end of work career, but it is also important to increase labour force participation rates in the middle, for both men and women. Thus, it is decisive how easy it is to unify work and family (see e.g. Leira 2002; Gornick & Meyers 2005 and 2009; Mandel & Semyenov 2006; Prince Cooke 2011; Hobson 2013). The work-family relationship affects the solvency of welfare state in two ways. First, fertility rate has its impact upon a stable demographic structure and old-age dependency ratio. As Esping-Andersen (2009) puts it; good family policy is the best pension policy. In the developed world, there are substantial differences in fertility: whereas fertility rates are the highest in the Nordic and Liberal regimes (close to 2), they are somewhat lower in Central Europe (1.7), much lower in Southern Europe (1.3) and in East-Asia (Japan 1.4 and Korea 1.3); or close to one in Hong Kong and Macau (World Bank 2013). 
Second, for solving the sustainability deficits, tax bases have to be as wide as possible, which implies increasing both male and female employment. When it comes to the overall female employment rates there is still a more or less clear divide between the regimes. The regime-based differences in employment prevail although the within and the between-regime dispersion has diminished. Regime differences have squeezed but regimes have also become more consistent. In 1985, the difference between the high Nordic mean (75 percent) and the low Southern European mean (44 percent) was as much as 31 percentage points, while by 2010 it is only 14 percentage points (OECD 2012).
Since the mid-1980s the gender gap in employment has diminished. Whereas three decades ago the gap in employment was 12 percentage points in the Nordic countries, the difference was down to 6 percentage points by 2010. The corresponding gaps were 26 and 10 for Central Europe, 29 and 13 for the Anglo-liberal countries, and 36 and 17 for the South Europe. The gender employment gap in the Post-Socialist block was 17 percentage points in 2010. (OECD 1982; 1992; and 2012). Since the early 1990s, participation rates have gone down and by now the female economic activity in the Post-Socialist countries is as low as in the traditional male breadwinner countries.
A clear converging trend can be seen also in age-specific labour force participation rates among women. The previous M-shaped (prevalent in the Central-European, Liberal and also East Asian regimes) and the sharply peaked (in South Europe) employment patters are converging towards the upside-down U-formation, typical for the Nordic model. Traditionally, having children in Southern Europe led to withdrawal from employment (Esping-Andersen 2009; Mandel & Shalev 2008 and 2009), which is reflected in the peak of employment in the age bracket 20 to 24 years of age whereafter the employment rates sharply diminish (‘South E’ in the left-hand panel). The M-curve in the Anglo-liberal regime indicates that women with family responsibilities are outside the labour force but when children are grown up, they re-enter into employment (see e.g. Stier & Lewin-Epstein 2001). 
Figure 4. Female labour force participation rates (%) according to age in different welfare state regimes. 

 
Sources: OECD 1992; OECD 2010; OECD 2013a
An alternative way to look at the impact of motherhood upon employment is to compare employment among women without children and women with children. Whereas in Scandinavia this difference – or motherhood penalty – is negligible, in the other regimes the penalty is substantial. In Czech Republic and Hungary, the motherhood penalty is over 30 percentage points and in the UK and Germany it goes up to 20 percentage points (Esping-Andersen 2009, 84-85). 
The Three Worlds paid attention to the gendered stratification effect of welfare states but did not analyse the duration of family-related absences from the paid labour. The EU SILC gives us possibilities to carry out comparisons on longitudinal micro-data to depict to what extent welfare regimes display differences in motherhood-related absences from the labour market (Figure 5). 
Figure 5. The duration of maternity-related absence from the labour market. 
Source: own calculations based on EU-SILC micro data.

As can be seen the Scandinavian mothers return to employment fairly early, while child birth in the Post Socialist regime seems to lead to longer absences. A bit surprisingly, Southern European mothers are faster to be employed than their Continental European counterparts. Partly this is explained by higher fertility rates (1.7 in Central Europe vs. 1.4 in the Southern Europe) which is associated by multiple births and hence, longer absences. Furthermore, in some Continental European countries (e.g. in Austria) there are possibilities to prolong the parental leave up to the child is three years of age. These examples fortify the strong gender-based stratification effect the welfare state institutions have in exit-entry patterns (Esping-Andersen 1999; 2001 and 2009; Korpi 2000; Mandel 2012).
In the family policy area, there is a kind of on going dual process, which is strongly regime-biased (e.g., Ellingsæter & Leira 2006; Ferrarini 2006; Lewis 2012). On one hand, female labour force rates are high in the Nordic regime but, on the other hand, fathers have their specific paternity leave schemes and daddy quotas leading to more gender neutral division of family responsibilities. In Scandinavia mothers are liberated to work and fathers are liberated to take on care-responsibilities at home. However, this is apparently an unfinished revolution. As long as the parental leave schemes are not designed as individual rights it appears unlikely that the remaining gender differences not only in exit entry patterns on the labour market but also in pay gap and career opportunities will disappear. These gaps continue to exhibit gender deficits that goes in an opposite direction to the superior performance of women at all levels of the education systems in so many of the most advanced industrial nations. This suggests that policy makers should think outside the box of the current institutional design if they want to simultaneously reduce the stratification and sustainability deficits.
Labour market exit: stratification and sustainability
In The Three Worlds, Esping-Andersen takes up the issue of early exit from the labour market of ‘older’ workers (notably pp. 150 ff). He observes the common trend of decreasing (male) participation across regimes but points to the very large variation between regimes (along the common downward trend). He then challenges the two dominant views in the research that has focused either on benefit generosity of the pension systems or on unemployment levels for explaining the variation in time and space, and instead suggests that the most important source for the cross national variation is to be found in the interaction between high unemployment and generous benefits. This is why the Continental European countries show very high exit rates, whereas the Nordic equally generous ones do not.
While Esping-Andersen’s analysis has some elegance, it is fair to say that it is brief and suggestive, rather than confirmatory. Moreover, he does neither elaborate much on the stratification nor on the sustainability themes of the exit patterns, which after all constitute a fundamental change for the employment regimes.
Now the world is changing again. Since 1990, the trend towards earlier exit has been broken in many countries. Another part of the silent revolution, identified by Esping-Andersen (2009), is increased female labour force participation. Figure 6 provides data for a small number of countries but they illustrate that the new trends are affecting countries in all ‘worlds’ of capitalism. Sweden has maintained the highest overall participation rates during the entire period with no real decline for the total labour force, but if it had not been for the increased female participation rate it would have dipped until the mid-1990s. The UK and USA both see recovering participation rates for men and an increasing trend for women during the latter part of the period. The increased participation rates for Germany are remarkable but also in France do we see an increase for the recent period, albeit from lower levels.
Figure 6. Employment shares of elderly (60 to 64 years of age) workers in some OECD countries. 

(Source: OECD 1992; 2010b and 2012)
This is also related to some of the concluding remarks that Esping-Andersen makes in the last chapter of ‘The Three Worlds’. The Achilles’ heel of the Swedish model is the tax ceilings inevitably to be met by a model that is maintaining full employment by largely relying on part-time female public employment. What he is underestimating is the magnitude of the silent revolution; women are working the same hours as men to an increasing degree, and that has consequences for the tax base. The common trend towards increased labour force participation is good news in terms of the ambition to decrease the sustainability deficit. What about the stratification deficit? On the basis of the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), we calculated the poverty rates for the age group 55-64 years of age with 50 of the median income for the entire population used as the poverty line. It is worth pointing to some country differences as well as to changes that have taken place.
We found that for those who had remained on the labour market, poverty rates were by and large following country averages both in the mid 1980s and more recently (around 2005). However, poverty rates are higher among those who have no earnings among the ‘pre-retirement elderly’ (aged 55 to 64) but the effect of employment exit appear to be dependent, in different ways, on what kind of social security system that serves as safety nets for the household. Those who can rely on a retirement income are generally better off than those who rely on social insurance benefits who in turn are better off than those who rely on social assistance. Moreover, the relative income, poverty and inequality among those who are outside paid employment are very different when we compare countries. These differences, by and large, follow from the differences in regimes (social policy institutions). High coverage as well as high benefit levels of social insurance programs help to reduce inequality in all the three respects mentioned above. When it comes to the inequality outcomes, in the mid-1980s countries clustered fairly well according to The Three Worlds. More than two decades later, the inequality patterns prevail to an extent that would perhaps even surprise regime-dependent scholars. In countries with typically flat-rate benefits, such as Ireland and the UK, poverty rates have risen particularly fast. 
Hence, with regard to ‘sustainability’ the changes over the past decades by and large go in the right direction. It has apparently been possible to break the downward trend in labour force participation among men in pre-retirement age, and the underlying trend towards higher participation among women is also pushing up participation rates among women in the ages 55-64 in most countries. The picture is less positive when it comes to inequality indicators: In some countries, poverty rates in this age group have seen large increases for those outside employment. Given the on-going tightening of contribution conditions for old age pensions as well as of qualifying conditions for invalidity benefits in many countries, there appears to be a stratification deficit building up in this exit phase of the economic life cycle. Considering the systematically worse health conditions of women in this age group, there is an obvious gender bias in this process. Still, to judge from the low poverty rates among non-employed pre-retirement elderly in some of the European countries, there appears to be policy instruments available that can deal with the stratification deficits as well, without jeopardising the sustainability deficits. 
Conclusions
A few tentative conclusions follow from our explorations of the data at hand. The first one is the shift in the discursive focus. Economic and demographic challenges for the sustainability of the welfare state have taken the floor. How to put people (back) into employment is seen as a key factor for sustainability. Countries are looking for means to increase employment among the young, to give better possibilities for mothers to work and to create incentives for the old to continue to work. At the same time, the concern with increasing inequalities, as for example manifested in the OECD report Divided We Stand (2011), is an argument for formulating the policy goals in terms of both stratification and sustainability. And for thinking beyond decommodification-recommodification divide.
All regimes struggle with problems, partly the same and partly different. In the Nordic / Social democratic regime the expansion of state employment in the social service sector not only facilitated female employment but also helped maintaining high employment and equality in more general terms. However, the expansion of this kind of employment requires tax funding, and this works as long as it is seen as a deferred wage, otherwise the tax burden will erode competitiveness. Wage moderation was an issue 25 years ago. Today, from the life cycle deficit perspective the problem in the Nordic countries is the school-to-work transition.The Central European/Conservative , Southern European and Post Socialist regimes face the problem how to expand female labour force participation and prolong employment careers in the end. Furthermore, the low fertility rates that plague all these regimes and some more than others, will create problems for the long term sustainability of pension policies. The Liberal regime is wrestling with increased inequalities in incomes as well as labour market conditions. 
Secondly, the notion of ‘Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism’ is less valid today than a quarter a century ago. This has to do with two different processes. One is that the old three regimes have changed at least in some respects, primarily having to do with the modernization of family policy and the activation turn in labour market policy. The other is that the old world of the 18 OECD countries is changing by extension of the OECD and of the EU. This has implied that a number of new worlds of welfare capitalisms are emerging. The ‘Latin rim’ or Southern European was first to be labelled but we argue that the Post-Socialist world has increased the variation more, and perhaps it is time to talk about a specific ‘Asian regime’ with South Korea as the clearest case accompanied by Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau (Kwon 2005).
While it appears that countries to some extent still cluster in regimes, the ‘three worlds’ appear as less powerful tool for descriptive purposes. Perhaps more importantly, there are good reasons for moving beyond the regime approach for anlytical purposes. If we want to be more precise about how societal institutions can achive the goals of less stratification and more sustainability, it is motivated to move the comparative research strategy towards a more variable and program specific approach (Palme 2006). But here it is important to follow in the footsteps of Esping-Andersen and analyse the interactions between different programs, and to look for the institutional complementarities (cf. the ‘Varieties of Capitalism school of thought’, Hall & Soskice 2001). Here the concepts of stratification and sustainability appear to be particularly useful in terms of sorting out different goal dimensions. That economic sustainability is about both labour supply and labour productivity should be fairly straightforward to judge from the - admittedly sketchy - data that we have presented in this paper. The social sustainability of the regimes is dependent on how well the regimes combat poverty and inequality but may also have feedbacks on the economic sustainability insofar as there are feedbacks on fertility, labour force behaviour in all phases of the life cycle and human capital formation (and hence on labour supply and productivity). 
Among the current Worlds of Welfare, our results show remarkable regime differences in how countries are able to deal with both stratification and sustainability over the three different phases in the economic life cycle we studied. Some would argue that this is a consequence of different political preferences in how to deal with an underlying trade-off between stratification and sustainability. We suggest that such an interpretation is the result of an unintended intellectual consequence of the ‘Three Worlds’; that countries are locked into old regimes and unable to learn from others. In contrast to this approach, we argue for a variable approach that could be used for unlocking not only the analysis of welfare state exit-entry patterns but also to inform a new policy agenda in ageing societies. But then we need to think beyond ‘The Three Worlds’ and apply its core concepts in a deeper analysis of the current real worlds of welfare capitalism.
The fact that countries differ not only suggests that institutions matter but also that there is room for policy learning. A broader understanding of how welfare, educational, and labour market policies work together is an important lesson from The Three Worlds that we should make good use of if we want with research want to learn from ‘best practice’. In the end, this is about designing policies that can foster equality and sustainability simultaneously. What in this context appears as the forgotten dimension of the sustainability of the regimes has to do with its political dimension. This was in the forefront of The Three Worlds. In this respect, we would argue that little has changed. The critical issue is still how political coalitions can be created and maintained in post-industrial societies, and it remains an open question.



Bibliography:
Åberg, R. (2003) ‘Unemployment persistency, over-education and the employment chances of the less educated’, European Sociological Review 19 (3): 199-216
Aidukaite, J (2004) The Emergence of the Post-Socialist Welfare State. Stockholm: Södertörns högskola. 
Allmendinger, J. (1989) ‘Educational systems and labor market outcomes’, European Sociological Review 5 (3): 231-250.
Blossfeld, H-P., Buchholz, S. and Kurz, K. (eds.) (2011) Aging Populations, Globalization and the Labor Market. Cheltenhamn: Edward Elgar.
Boudon R. (1974) Education, Opportunity, and Social Inequality. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Brzinsky-Fay, C. (2011) School-to-Work Transitions in International Comparison. Tampere: Acta Universitatis Tamperensis 1663.
Castles, F., Leibfried, S., Lewis, J. and Obinger, H. (eds.) (2012): The Oxford Handbook of the Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Ellingsæter, A L. and Leira, A. (eds.) (2006) Politicizing Parenthood in Scandinavia. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990) Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999) Social Foundations of Post Industrial Economics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (ed.) (2002) Why We Need a New Welfare State? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (2009) The Incomplete Revolution. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
European Comission (2009) Sustainability report 2009. Brussels: the European Union.
European Comission (2012a) The 2012 Ageing Report: Economic and budgetary projections for the EU27 Member States (2010-2060) Brussels: the European Union.
European Comission (2012b: Fiscal Sustainability Report European Economy 8/2012. Brussels: European Union. 
European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (2012) NEETs. Young people not in employment, education or training: Characteristics, costs and policy responses in Europe. Dublin 2012.
Eurostat (2013a) http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/microdata/eu_silc
Eurostat (2013b) http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php?title=File:Old_age_dependency_ratio_on_1_January_of_selected_years.PNG&filetimestamp=20110609135954
Ferrarini, T. (2006): Families, States and Labour Markets. Cheltenhamn: Edward Elgar.
Gesthuizen, M., Solga, H. and Künster, R. (2011) ‘Context Matters: Economic Marginalization of Low-Educated Workers in Cross-National Perspective’, European Sociological Review 27 (2): 264-280.
Gornick, J. and Meyers, M. (2005) Families That Work: Policies for Reconciling Parenthood and Employment. New York: Russel Sage. 
Gornick, J. and Meyers, M. (2009) Gender Equality: Transforming Family Divisions of Labor. London: Verso. 
Gough, I., Wood, G., Barrientos, A., Bevan, P., Davis, P. and Room, G. (2004) Insecurity and Welfare Regimes in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hall, P. and Soskice, D. (eds.) (2001) Varieties of Capitalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hobson, B. (ed.) (2013): Worklife Balance: The Agency and Capabilities Gap. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
http://www.oecd.org/education/skills-beyond-school/EDIF%202013--N%C2%B013%20%28eng%29--FINAL.pdf 
http://ntaccounts.org/web/nta/show/Country%20Summaries
http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DatasetCode=LFS_SEXAGE_I_R#
http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/pubdocs/2012/54/en/1/EF1254EN.pdf
ILO (2013) Global Employment Trends for Youth 2013. A generation at risk. Geneva: ILO.
Korpi, W. (2000) ‘Faces of Inequality: Gender, Class, and Patterns of Inequalities in Different Types of Welfare States’, Social Politics 7 (2): 127-191.
Kvist, J., Fritzell, J., Hvinden, B. and Kangas, O. (eds.) (2012) Changing Social Equality. Ther Nordic welfare model in the 21st century. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Kwon, H. (ed.) (2005) Transforming the Developmental Welfare State in East Asia. Houndsmill: Palgrave. 
Lee, R. and Mason, A. (2011) Population Aging and the Generational Economy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Leira, A. (2002) Working Parents and the Welfare State. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lewis, J. (1992)’Gender and the Development of Welfare Regimes’ Journal of European Social Policy 1992 (2): 3, 159-173
Lewis, J. (1997)’Gender and Welfare Regimes: Further Thoughts’, Social Politics 1997 (4): 2, 160-177. 
Lewis, J. (2012)’Gender equality and work-family balance in a cross-national perspective’, in J. Scott, S. Dex and A. Plagnol (eds.) Gendered lives. Cheltenhamn: Edward Elgard, 206-224. 
Lindh, T. (2012) ‘Social investment in the aging populations of Europe’, in N. Morel, B. Palier, and J. Palme (eds.) Towards a social investment welfare state. Bristol: Policy Press, 261-284.
Lundvall, B.-Å.and Lorenz, E. (2012) ‘Social investment in the globalizing economy’, in N. Morel, B. Palier and J. Palme(eds.): Towards a social investment welfare state. Bristol: Policy Press, 235-260. 
Mandel, H. and Semyonov, M. (2006) ‘A Welfare State Paradox: State Interventions and Women’s Employment Opportunities in 22 Countries’, American Journal of Sociology 111 (6) :1910-1949.
Mandel, H. and Shalev, M. (2009) ‘How Welfare States Shape the Gender Pay Gap’ Social Forces 87 (4): 1873-1912.
Mandel, H. (2012) ‘Winners and Losers: The Consequences of Welfare State Policies for Gender Wage Inequality’, European Sociological Review 28 (2): 241–262.
Mayer, K-U. (2004): ‘Whose Lives? How History, Societies, and Institutions Define and Shape Life Courses’, Research in Human Development Vol 1 Issue 3:161-187.
Müller, W. and Gangl, M. (eds.) (2003) Transitions from Education to Work in Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003
OECD (1982) Historical Statistics 1960-1980. Paris: OECD.
OECD (1992) Labour Force Statistics 1970-1990. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2000) From Initial Education to Working Life. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2010a) Off to a Good Start? Jobs for the Youth. Paris: OECD. 
OECD (2010b) Labour Force Statistics 1990-2008. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2011) Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2012) Labour Force Statistics 2012. Paris: OECD. 
OECD (2013a) http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/download/8107021ec010.pdf?expires=1387880115&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=7783B7D9D033C7CE47EA1B18A5F4F99C
OECD (2013b) http://www.oecd.org/els/family/oecdfamilydatabase.htm.
Orloff, A. S. (1993) ’Gender and the Social Rights of Citizenship’, American Sociological Review 58(3): 303-328
Park, D. (ed.) (2011) Pension Systems and Old-Age Income Support in East and Southeast Asia. Oxon: Routledge. 
Prince Cooke, L. (2011) Gender-Class Equality in Political Economies. London: Routledge.
Riihelä, M., Vaittinen, R. and Vanne, R. (2011) Changing Patterns of Intergenerational Resource Allocation in Finland. Helsinki: Finnish Centre for Pensions, Reports 2011:1
Sainsbury, D.(1996) Gender, Equality and Welfare States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sainsbury, D. (2012) Welfare States and Immigrant Rights. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schröder, H. and Ganzeboom, H. (2014) ‘Measuring and Modelling Level of Education in European Societies’, European Sociological Review 30 (1): 119-136
Scruggs, L., Jahn, D. and Kuitto, K. (2014) Comparative Welfare Entitlements Dataset 2. Version 2014-03. University of Connecticut & University of Greifswald.
Shavit, Y. and Müller, W. (eds.) (1998) From School to Work. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Stier, H. and Lewin-Epstein, N. (2001) ‘Welfare Regimes, Family-Supportative Policies, and Women’s Employment along the Life-Course’, American Journal of Sociology 106 (May): 1731-1760. 
Vanhuysse, P. and Goerres, A. (eds.) (2012) Ageing Populations in Post-Industrial Democracies. Oxon: Routledge.
World Bank (2013): http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN/countries.